Team: Sandeep Kambhampati, Sophie Guo

Proposed Project: Bridging autoregressive and diffusion models for image generation. Recent advances in autoregressive (AR) models have closed the gap in image generation quality compared to Diffusion Transformers by exploring novel tokenization strategies (such as hierarchical tokenization at multiple scales as in "Visual Autoregressive Modeling (VAR): Scalable Image Generation via Next-Scale Prediction" (https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.02905) or modeling per-token probability distributions via a Diffusion Loss as in "Autoregressive Image Generation without Vector Quantization" (https://arxiv.org/pdf/2406.11838). These works share conceptual similarities to Diffusion Transformers in terms of "coarse-to-fine" learning and modeling images in a continuous embedding space. In VAR, after training a multi-scale VQ-VAE, multi-scale token maps are autoregressively generated from coarse to fine scales i.e., lower to higher resolutions. Although vector quantization can provide a useful form of compression and regularization, VQ-VAEs are hard to train and may also leads to information loss, harming reconstruction quality. Other work has demonstrated that discrete tokenization is not a pre-requisitve for autoregressive models and in fact, using continuous-valued tokens (where the per-token probability distribution is modelled via an MLP and trained using a DDPM procedure), can improve image generation quality.

We would thus be interested in exploring how combining continuous embeddings with a multi-scale embedding strategy can improve the quality of image generation and image representation learning in an autoregressive generation procedure. Practically, this would amount to first pre-training a multi-scale VQ-VAE on an image dataset to learn multi-scale latent embeddings of the image dataset. We would then compare various evaluation metrics of image generation quality (FID, IS, etc.) when training a scale-wise AR model either A) directly using the vector-quantized embeddings or B) using the continuous embedding (prior to VQ) as the condition of a small denoising diffusion network at each scale. This strategy could potentially have benefits of improved training efficiency, inference compute, and scalability compared to Diffusion Transformers.
